# System Description

*Opioid-Abuse Predictor*

Created: 06/23/2023 by Tom Lever

Updated: 07/04/2023 by Srimann Ramachandruni

Updated: 07/06/2023 by Morgan Durham

Updated: 07/07/2023 by Morgan Durham 

## Context: Previous Research

The opioid epidemic refers to the rampant misuse and addiction to opioid drugs, leading to devastating consequences on public health. Doctors may be uncomfortable prescribing opioids due to concerns about potential misuse, addiction, and the risk of overdose associated with these medications. Opioids, such as oxycodone, hydrocodone, morphine, and methadone, are prescribed by medical providers to alleviate severe symptoms including constipation, respiratory distress, and more commonly pain. Although effective, the adverse effects of opioids, such as dependence, abuse, and poisoning, have resulted in 130 deaths of Americans daily and impose significant financial and resource burdens on the healthcare system. Since approximately 91.8 million (37.8%) civilian non-institutionalized adults in the United States consumed prescription opioids in 2015 and 13.5 million (5.5%) of them had some form of opioid misuse, determining individuals who are at an increased susceptibility to these conditions is essential for responsible pain and system management (Han et al. 2015). To support providers in clinical decision making, statistical methods and machine learning techniques can analyze vast amounts of electronic health record (EHR) data and identify patterns and risk factors of aberrant drug-related behavior (ADRB) associated with opioids. These models can help predict individuals at a higher risk of dependence, abuse, and poisoning, enabling providers to tailor their prescribing practices and interventions accordingly. By utilizing these tools, medical providers can strike a balance between effectively managing pain and symptoms while prioritizing patient safety and mitigating the negative consequences of opioid use.

Currently, there are two primary statistical methods used to identify individuals at an increased susceptibility for ADRB and their associated risk factors: self-reported questionnaires/assessments and machine learning algorithms. Self-reported tools such as the Opioid Risk Tool (ORT), Screener and Opioid Assessment for Patients with Pain, and the Current Opioid Misuse Measure have been developed with physician input and implemented based on current EHR systems. Among these tools, the ORT is the most popular, consisting of a 10-item questionnaire administered by medical providers to assess the risk for opioid-related ADRB. However, despite their accessibility and promising potential, the ORT, in addition to the other self-reported tools, has relatively poor evidence of its accuracy and consists of items that rather more generally predict substance use disorder (SUD). Adaptations to the ORT and related tools, while improving accuracy, acknowledge limitations due to self-reported error and evaluation of subjects at a single point in time.

Machine learning algorithms offer an alternative approach that doesn’t rely on self reported measures. Instead, these algorithms analyze EHR data and encompass various factors such as demographics and diagnosis to predict an individual's risk of opioid related aberrant drug related behavior and to identify associated risk factors. Several machine learning algorithms have been studied for this purpose, including logistic regression, decision trees, random forest, deep neural networks (DNN’s), and recurrent neural networks (RNN’s), among others. While they generally have comparable if not better performance than the previously mentioned class of tools, RNN’s stand out as a popular and effective method in the identification of individuals with increased vulnerability to opioid-related ADRB’s. RNN’s, in contrast to other common traditional machine learning algorithms, take into account temporal variations in medications, diagnoses, and other factors, enabling them to capture how the risk of opioid-related ADRBs changes over time.

For instance, in a study by Che et al., an RNN was employed to classify opioid users into long-term users, short-term users, and opioid dependent patients, achieving AUC scores of 0.80. Building upon this work, Dong et al. further enhanced the performance by incorporating Long-Short-Term Memory (LSTM) models and bidirectional layers to address limitations such as vanishing and exploding gradients associated with RNNs. These applications of RNN’s improved upon the performances of their counterpart ML algorithms that did not consider the temporal dependencies of medications, procedures, conditions, etc. It is still important to recognize, however, that there are still challenges to these models, notably interpretability. Although these methods and architectural choices certainly divide most of the current research, further specifications such as the specific population of focus, target classes, and feature selection truly distinguish the works within this field. 

With regards to the population of focus, several risk assessment tools have concentrated on predicting either prior to a patient receiving a prescription of opioids or after prescription of opioids whether the patient will exhibit opioid-related ADRB. The COMM (Current Opioid Misuse Measure), for example, identifies if a patient that is currently prescribed opioids is at a high risk of developing opioid-related ADRB’s. Similarly, many of the machine learning applications select the first incident of an ADRB as the target encounter, thereby allowing changes during the course of prescription to serve as features. Alternatively, The ORT and SOAPP (Screener and Opioid Assessment for Patients with Pain) serves as pre pre-screening assessment that informs providers about the safety of initiating opioid medications for a patient with chronic non-malignant pain. 

The term ADRB encompasses various adverse drug reactions, with opioid poisoning, abuse, and dependence being the most commonly studied. Opioid poisoning, commonly known as an overdose, occurs when opioids are consumed excessively, leading to subsequent inhibition of the central nervous system. Opioid dependence, contrastingly, describes a physical reliance on opioids to alleviate pain, making it more challenging to predict compared to opioid poisoning, as the symptoms may be less apparent. While opioid abuse and dependence may be utilized interchangeably, there is a meaningful distinction between the two. Opioid abuse is characterized by improper use, while opioid dependence involves physiological reliance. Furthermore, opioid abuse can sometimes precede opioid dependency, and the reporting of opioid dependency can be complex and may be over or underreported. These distinctions emphasize the importance of examining these conditions separately and scrutinizing their nuances, which can enhance the performance of the statistical methods aimed at predicting them.

Due to the similar natures of various opioid-related ADRB’s, the risk factors and predictors associated with them were generally consistent. The ORT consists of 10-questions that assess factors such as substance abuse history, age, sexual abuse, and presence of psychiatric disease. Screening assessment tools like the SOAPP also incorporate similar criteria focusing on substance abuse history, medication-related behaviors, and psychiatric behaviors. Similarly, some machine learning applications have focused on a smaller set of features for prediction including factors such as depression, alcoholism, immunization history, and medications such as natural Opium Alkaloids and phenylpiperidine derivatives (Beaver, Burek, and Shakeri 2022). The vast majority, however, have adopted a more comprehensive approach, examining over a hundred features. In spite of this, these studies commonly share features such as pain levels, opioid prescriptions, opioid dependence, and the use of other analgesic medications.

## Opportunity Opioid-Abuse Predictor Will Address

In this study, we aim to improve upon the general objective of the ORT, which is to predict prior to a patient receiving an opioid prescription the probability of the patient exhibiting opioid-related ADRB (opioid abuse). There is a relative scarcity of machine learning studies that focus on the same patient population; i.e, individuals being evaluated prior to starting opioid medication. Addressing this gap is crucial as identifying risk factors prior to prescription can significantly aid in preventing the need for opioid tapering. Opioid tapering, while a logical intervention, can paradoxically worsen pain, function, and psychiatric symptoms due to protracted abstinence syndrome. Therefore, focusing on predicting opioid abuse is crucial, considering its potential to initiate dependence and the complexity of opioid dependence diagnoses. Furthermore, this project will expand our focus to include all individuals without cancer who have been prescribed opioids at least once in their medical history who may be prescribed opioids. Accordingly, we will predict the probability of opioid abuse in individuals with severe constipation, respiratory distress, and chronic non-malignant pain (CNMP), unlike the ORT, which only examines individuals with CNMP.

Our Opioid-Abuse Predictor aims to mobilize NIH researcher workbench EHR data to serve as a modern and user-friendly foundation for future research endeavors. Our Opioid-Abuse Predictor aims to apply advanced technologies such as LSTM, RNNs, and factor analysis to explore the critical temporal dependencies among medication, procedure, lab results, and diagnosis histories, leading to more precise predictions of opioid abuse probabilities. 

Ultimately, the Opioid-Abuse Predictor aims to function as a vital tool for healthcare providers, offering clinical decision-making support. Its purpose is to enhance patient safety by providing more informed guidance to providers when prescribing opioids. 

## What Opioid-Abuse Predictor Will Do

The Opioid-Abuse Predictor will be a system that a Requester may use prior to any prescription of opioids to submit a Patient and receive a prediction of the probability that a patient will exhibit an opioid-related ADRB.

## Iterations Of Development
At the end of Iteration…
1. Opioid-Abuse Predictor will be as described in “What the Opioid-Abuse Predictor Will Do”.